our very own Jake Ward is sheltering in
place as part of a mandate for nine
counties in the San Francisco Bay Area
he gave us a look at what his first 24
hours have been like I just drove in
from Oakland to downtown San Francisco
where there was plenty of parking ahead
of a midnight shelter-in-place order
that goes into effect tonight I'm headed
into my office to grab the last few
things I'll need for three weeks of
shrine report the news from home our
Bureau has gone dark nobody is coming in
for interviews no guests we're not doing
any of the normal business of reporting
the news from here the whole place is
shut down I think what I need for three
weeks
let's do this job on my own I got to a
certain flight being in here where it's
this bill it felt nervous being in here
this long so I decided to put on like a
95 ask and that's it I've got all my
stuff camera microphone lights to try to
do the job from home for three weeks
starting now here in the Bay Area we are
preparing to be basically at home under
this order which lasts until April 7th
and that means no non-essential travel
unless we are actively sick in some sort
of emergency or have run out of food and
must make a run to a grocery store we
otherwise have to stay at home essential
services will remain open grocery stores
pharmacies but everything else
essentially bars restaurants gyms all of
that is closed and that means we're all
getting get used to life at home we've
been preparing here to be busy the
educators of our own children so we've
caught up with this little scheduled
8:00 to 9:00 a.m.
9:00 to 10:00 a.m. writing and literacy
and reading a snack a playtime movement
a meditation time which we are all going
to need all of this is you know us just
kind of winging it none of us are
trained in my community you know to do
this kind of thing we don't know how to
stay home the incredible pressure that
we're all gonna feel to remain in our
houses try to make some sort of
meaningful life for our children while
we're here and most fundamentally to do
whatever we can to not go out all of
that is going to be a tremendous
challenge for people in this community
right now it's kind of cute my kids have
a nice little routine going my wife is
doing conference calls but you cut to
week three and you know who know who's
how we're all gonna be feeling about one
another much less what we're gonna be
eating
[Music]
No
like seven million other people in the
Bay Area we were trying to figure out
what are we gonna do with our time it
originally I have said we don't need to
worry about you know no big deal we can
just wing it well no my wife argued we
need some sort of structure and that has
been the lesson of day one maintaining a
school like schedule negotiating with
each other about who's on and who's off
and having those conversations clearly
with everyone in the family that might
get us today 21 this is our new reality
we're trying to homeschool our kids my
wife is somehow I'm doing that while
working her full-time job we're trying
to figure out you know do we have enough
food on hand and the real question is I
mean this is day one what is life gonna
be like here 21 days in
[Music]
and jake joins us now from his home in
oakland california Jake thanks for
letting us in and your house there and a
little idea of what's going on
you know yesterday New York City Mayor
Bill DeBlasio said in a press conference
that shelter in place could go in effect
as soon as tomorrow here in New York
City 48 hours notice how do you prepare
for that you know for me you know we
really had no idea I mean here in the
California Bay Area we have some sense
of emergency preparation right in my
backyard I have a chest that has
emergency equipment for things like
fires and earthquakes you know the
things that we get here but this idea
that we were supposed to lay in supplies
for several weeks at home is a whole new
thing I will say when I compare how our
experience has been to what I have read
about life in Wuhan right where where
security guards were posted at the
entrances to people's homes keeping them
from leaving or entering where your
phone was tracking you everywhere you
went and telling you whether or not you
were quarantined you know life is pretty
loose here as compared to that but
certainly there is this order right the
most strict in the country here in the
Bay Area that says you can't go out
except for essential activities of
course here in California we consider an
essential activity to include exercising
outdoors we're allowed to do that but
we're not allowed to do it in groups and
doing so they say on the order is
illegal and so I think we're we're
wavering on the edge here of a real need
to lock it down right that is certainly
what you know you know we need to stop
sort of exchanging air and exchanging
you know any sort of close contact
because that is the danger here so the
question is you know this feels pretty
tight to me but you know is it too
porous is it gonna let too much through
in the end that's the big question for
and time will tell but you described
Wuhan which is more of a lockdown
situation you're in a shelter in a place
situation what's still open there yeah
here you know we have essential services
and that counts
there's a lot of things that fall under
that rubric it turns out so grocery
stores pharmacies they are still open
they're observing some some strictures
around how many people are allowed in at
a time so I just tooled around yesterday
and saw that our grocery store had a
line of several hundred people out into
the parking lot because they're only
letting in about ten people at a time
right so that stuff has changed but it
is still open
hospitals are open police departments
are still open all the essential
services but then you get into a sort of
squishier category when it comes to
things like rideshares you are allowed
to use uber and lyft right a rideshare
service if you're going somewhere
essential but that puts those drivers in
an impossible situation right things
like you know going out for medical
supply it's definitely still allowed to
do that pharmacies you know those things
are all there but gyms restaurants all
of that done it's not gotten so far as
to actually shut down private vehicle
traffic the way they did in China but
certainly the streets are very quiet
it's quite spooky walking around you
know my Street which has cars typically
going up and down didn't move much at
all in fact when grocery sorry when
garbage trucks went by yesterday I found
myself deeply relieved by that to know
that sort of the systems are still
moving there's a real eerie kind of
frozen in time quality to being here
right now it's definitely a new normal
if you're happy to see the garbage truck
but grocery stores you mentioned they're
still open
is there anything to buy their shelves
empty like they are in a lot of places
you know it seemed that the sort of the
panic buying and I gotta say I was I was
you know I did this too I immediately
found myself fixated on the idea that I
needed a chest freezer right one of
those garage top-loading freezers
because I thought you know I have to lay
in a lot of foods I may get one yeah
they're sold out across the Bay Area but
then you look at it and you realize no
actually the supply of food is pretty
solid we really do have a good supply of
food I mean we live in California it's
the breadbasket of America you know I
think we're gonna be okay on the food
front so the supplies seem okay it's for
me this larger question of can we you
know right now I think of the first few
days everyone's taking it pretty
seriously but I wonder you know after a
couple of days maybe a week two weeks
are people gonna start to break out of
it you know we saw that I was just
reading a history of the 1918 flu
epidemic that was specific to Oakland
the history
specific to Oakland and there was
enormous uproar about the inconvenience
of it because for more than a month you
had to wear a mask yet to do all of
these things and so I wonder are we
going to continue to be able to do this
without the sort of strictures that
China put on its citizens I certainly
hope so and certainly you know I think
we're trying to take it in the spirit of
we're very lucky we have a house right
we have a yard we get along pretty well
we've got good food all of those things
I think are gonna make it possible for
us to to do this in the long term but
certainly there's this psychological
challenge and for us I mean as you saw
there the thing for us we're learning is
structure not just the structure of the
day the scheduling of the day but also
how you use the space so I had my camera
set up with lights and everything in the
living room oh you know we got into such
an argument about it because that's got
to be sacred space when you're all gonna
be stuck in one place so now I'm in the
basement this is the basement if I spun
the camera around you'd see my laundry
machine you know you have to do that
kind of thing I think to get us to make
us get along in these kinds of confined
spaces for this amount of time and Jake
I want to thank you for giving us some
insight into what could become reality
for the rest of us and giving us a time
to show what exactly is going on in your
house during your shelter-in-place so
thank you very much Jake how this is
going to work in New York I have no idea
but I really are really I think we'll
find out here soon
hey NBC News viewers thanks for checking
out our YouTube channel subscribe by
clicking on that button down here and
click on any of the videos over here to
watch the latest interviews show
highlights and digital exclusives thanks
for watching